Transcriber: Leonardo Silva
Reviewer: Amanda Chu
I had just finished teaching
Introduction to American Politics
to a group of eager undergraduates.
This was my first year teaching,
but I had pulled off a slamming lecture,
and I was feeling good about myself.
As I left the classroom,
I looked down at my phone
and saw that I had five missed calls
from my brother Kenny.
At the time, Kenny was a student
at Temple University
and living in North Philly.
For those who don't know North Philly,
it's an area that is predominantly
black and low-income,
with a very visible police presence.
When I returned his phone call,
Kenny is loud and swearing into the phone.
I can tell that something
very bad happened,
but I'm not sure what.
When I'm finally able
to get him to calm down,
he tells me how he was sitting
on the stoop of his building
talking to a friend
when four police officers ran up on him
and threw him and three
others on the ground,
handcuffed them and then
pushed them up against a wall,
all the while asking them,
"What drugs do you have?
What drugs do you have?"
Kenny had no drugs.
He told the officers this many times,
but each statement of no drugs
only seemed to provoke more force
and make the officers more upset.
As Kenny sat, cuffed,
and slumped against a brick wall,
he quietly told the officers that he was
a student at Temple University
and without reason,
they could not hold him.
The officers finally retrieved
his college ID,
which was in his wallet
that had slipped out
when he was slammed to the pavement,
realized that he was indeed
in college, without drugs,
and then let him go.
After Kenny told me this story,
he was still loud and upset.
I was shaking,
barely able to hold the phone to my ear,
all of the joy from my great day
of teaching - gone ...
and replaced with a deep sense
of helplessness and alarm.
I wanted to remove the hurt
and frustration that Kenny felt,
that I could hear so clearly
through the phone,
but I neither had the will
nor the ability to lie to him
about the mightiness of American racism.
And we both silently knew
that this would not be the last time
that he would be stopped
and frisked by the police for drugs.
In an attempt to try to calm him down
and to shift attention onto something
that he perhaps did have control over,
I had this genius idea
and suggested that he focused
his attention on school work
to kind of take his mind off of things.
He yells into the phone at me,
"What is that going to do?
Why should I focus on my school work
when the police are allowed
to do things like this?"
And then he says to me,
"I'm not a student in your class, Megan.
Your books are not going to save me."
I silently nodded
on the other end of the phone,
In a lifetime of often heated
exchanges with him,
I've probably never been more wrong,
and he has never been more right.
Kenny is not alone.
This violent interaction between black men
and women, and police officers
plays out in cities and towns
across the United States,
often with much more devastating results.
According to the most recent statistics,
blacks are three times more likely to be
shot and killed by police than whites.
The question on everyone's mind
and the question
that I get asked the most
is, "How do we solve this problem?"
And I confess I cringe at this question,
not because it's not a good question,
but because I think we're asking
the wrong question.
I'm not convinced we even understand
how we got to this point
in the fist place.
Better understanding of the root causes
of the current place where we are
will help provide us with the tools
that we need to move us forward.
However, I confess
that even I sometimes am more eager
to solve a problem
than I am to understand it.
So a few years ago,
I adopted a corgi from a shelter
and named him President Bartlet,
off of The West Wing.
(Laughter)
Now, he's super adorable!
But he was abused,
and he's very aggressive
whenever he sees another dog.
My fix in my first year was to walk him
at crazy hours of the day,
but this worked only marginally well,
and I was stressed and tired.
The following year,
I decided to hire a trainer
to try to figure the underlying issues
behind his reactive behavior.
On the first day of our meeting,
the trainer looks at me and says,
"Fixes that do not address the root causes
of an issue are not really fixes at all."
I realized that in my haste
to fix President Bartlet,
I actually had made him worse.
The present crisis surrounding race
in the United States, I think,
suffers from a lack of attention
to the root causes;
Better attention to the root causes,
I am convinced,
will help us to figure out
how to move past where we right now
in terms of the current racial climate
in the United States.
So why does the killing
of unarmed blacks to continue to happen?
I think it continues to happen
because we have the wrong diagnosis
and the wrong cure.
And what I mean by this
is we tend to think
the problem of racial violence
is isolated to a few stubborn racists
that haven't yet drunk
kind of this progressive Kool-Aid.
And we tend to think the cure
to racial injustices in the United States
should always revolve around education.
In the rest of my talk today,
I'm going to challenge both of these ideas
and suggest a new way
to understand the problem,
as well as the solution.
First, part of the reason
the killing of unarmed blacks
continues to happen at an alarming rate
is because we haven't properly addressed
our long history of
racial terror in this country,
which has treated blackness
as a proxy for criminality,
as a substitute for criminality.
Instead, when confronted with
kind of these jarring racial injustices,
what we like to do is to point
to the bad racist apples.
We like to individualize the problem
and situate it away from us.
This is why we're able to make sense
of, let's say, a Dylann Roof,
the shooter in Charlston, South Carolina,
who shot up the black church
and had a white-power manifesto.
But the problem with
contemporary racial violence
is not that we have
a few kind of racist bad apples.
The problem is that the whole tree,
the whole apple tree, is infected.
The problem is that the presumption
of dangerousness is tightly bound to race
for so many in this country.
For police officers
to justify the use of deadly force,
they have to reasonably believe
that their lives are in danger.
In all the high-profile killings
of blacks over the past year,
officers attest to feeling under threat.
But what does this mean
in the context of unarmed citizens?
It means that black skin
triggers a heightened sense of threat,
a life-threatening sense of threat,
that then influences the officers'
decision to use deadly force.
According to the most recent statistics,
33% of blacks that have been killed
by police were unarmed.
But it's not just police
that pop up this myth of black danger.
This myth gets reinforced
and takes on a truth-like quality
through everyday interaction,
when a black man passes
and a woman clutches her purse
or when a group
of black friends walk by a car
and hear the jarring sound of someone
who has just pushed their automatic locks
because they are afraid.
And I have friends on both sides of this:
black men with great jobs,
who just want to be viewed
as a person and not as a threat
after a long day of work;
and I have really great
white and Asian woman friends,
who clutch their purse and walk quickly
if they see a black man
on a dimly-lit street,
and then feel ashamed in the need
to over-explain their actions to me.
And I've also been on the receiving end
of having who I was
reduced to someone else's false perception
of how much of a danger I posed.
Last year, I was coming back from a trip,
and I was singled out by the TSA agent.
I thought that I had left a water bottle,
like I often do, in my bag.
But he ushered me to a separate area,
and then two more TSA agents
surrounded me,
and I knew in my gut
that something bad was about to go down.
The lead TSA agent
proceeds to ask - no, accuse - me
of bringing a weapon into the airport.
When I insisted that I did not bring
a weapon into the airport,
he produces a piece of costume jewelry,
a double ring that I had picked up
for $4 on vacation.
It was like his "gotcha" moment,
and it was my superconfused moment.
(Laughter)
He then accuses me of bringing
brass knuckles, a deadly weapon,
into a United States airport.
I was almost at a loss of words,
which is rare for someone like me,
but I politely pointed out to him
that the ring was plastic,
it wasn't brass,
and these weren't knuckles,
it was just a ring that went
over two fingers instead of one finger.
But have you ever talked to someone
and felt like you didn't exist,
like when they spoke to you,
they spoke right through you?
Well, that's how I felt.
He got more angry at my explanations,
looked me in my face, and said,
"You people always lie.
I know that this is a weapon,
and I'm not going to let someone
dangerous like you board a plane today."
Well, I started to shake, right?
Because we've all seen this movie
about the brown girl
who walks into the airport
with a deadly weapon,
and it never really ends well for her.
It doesn't. It never does.
So, I had to do what I hate doing,
and I used my credentials
to get me out of a bad situation.
I told him that I was a professor
of Constitutional Law
and American Politics.
(Laughter)
Right?
(Applause)
Yeah, so -
I cited US criminal code,
landmark Supreme Court decisions,
and rules from the
Homeland Security Rulebook,
because I also teach Civil Liberties.
And then he started to get very nervous.
(Laughter)
He asked what school I worked at.
I told him, he Googled my name,
and the blood drained from his face.
Right?
As he realized I wasn't making this up,
I knew my rights
and I was a college professor.
And then, when he looked back at me,
he finally saw me,
not as a dangerous threat,
but as a person.
After a few more minutes, he let me go,
to catch my much delayed flight,
I found a seat in the airport terminal,
still trembling with rage
at the way that I had been treated.
I was only seated for a few minutes
when I felt a tap on my shoulder.
A woman airport worker
said that she saw my whole ordeal,
and that he does this all the time
to black passengers,
and I was lucky to have been released
from his custody so quickly.
But it shouldn't take
a university website profile
to be viewed as non-threatening, right?
(Applause)
Part of the reason I shared this story
and some of the other ones
is that I think, in talking about
the current racial crisis,
we tend to focus
all of our attention on police
and overlook our own complicity
in creating an environment
in which black lives
are not treated as equal.
To be clear in thinking about
solutions to the racial violence,
I'm in favor of body cameras,
I'm in favor of a
non-militarized police force,
I'm in favor of stricter laws
that make officers more accountable
when they stop and frisk
people on the street.
But i'm not convinced
that we would need something
like body cameras
if we didn't live in a society
that treat blacks
as dangerous and suspicious first,
and as citizens second.
It's not just a few bad racist apples
in a police department or at an airport;
it's all of us, who in big ways
through our actions
and in small ways by our silences,
support this lie - because
that's what it is, it's a lie -
that somehow black folk
are more dangerous than the rest of us.
So not only do I believe
that we've misdiagnosed the problem,
I also think we have the wrong cure to it.
We keep offering up education
as a solution to all racial injustices
in the United States.
It's kind of what I call
sometimes in my classes
as the "Robitussin of civil rights."
Like, when I was little,
my mom loved Robitussin.
She would give me it.
I got a cold, Robitussin; flu, Robitussin
Like, allergies? Robitussin.
Like, where's the Penadryl?
(Laughter)
But just like Robitussin is not a cure-all
for all types of sicknesses,
education is not a cure-all
for all of America's racial sins.
And yet, education is still
how most Americans understand
the responsibility to fixing
contemporary racial injustices.
Our measure of how far we have come
in the area of race relations
is most often calculated
in how integrated our schools are,
how many inovative education experiments
are currently going on,
and how many federal dollars
are committed towards education.
But the contemporary problem
surrounding the killing of unarmed blacks
is not a problem
that boils down to providing greater
educational opportunities to blacks.
This is a misdiagnosis.
A book is not going to stop the bullet
barreling through a gun at Rekia Boyd
in Chicago,
and longer classroom times
are not going to save Freddie Gray
from being illegally stopped
and manhandled by police in Baltimore.
This is what I know for sure:
that in order to combat
continuing racial injustices today,
we must expand our vision
and our responsibility
to what civil rights actually means.
We must include the battle
against racist violence
in our understanding of civil rights.
Instead of education,
what if we placed freedom
from racist violence
at the crux of what it means to be free
and equal in the United States?
Doing so does not mean
that we necessarily dislodge education,
but it means that if racism
and white supremacy are a rock fortress,
we assemble greater arsenal weapons
to break the damn thing down.
(Applause)
I know this is not an easy task,
but I know that it can be done.
So in my real life,
I'm a political scientist and a historian,
and I've spent the last 10 years
focused on a surprising finding:
that before the civil rights
group the NAACP
focused on its historic campaign
against segregated education,
the NAACP spent the first two decades
of the 20th century
focused on fighting escalating levels
of racial violence that blacks endured
as a result of the actions from police,
politicians, and private white citizens
in the south and in the north.
In order to wage this big campaign
against racial violence,
the NAACP organized
mass demonstrations in the streets.
They lobbied Congress
to pass an anti-lynching bill.
They litigated and won a landmark decision
in front of the Supreme Court.
And they petitioned
three different presidents
to make a statement against lynching.
It was this massive, extraordinary,
in-your-face campaign
that forced America to confront
lynching and mob violence
against African Americans.
It asked America
how strong was its commitment
to protecting black lives.
As a result of this work
in early 20th century,
the rates of lynching and mob violence
dramatically decreased.
I tell this story about the NAACP's
historic kind of campaign
against racial violence
because I believe our past history can
light a way out of the present darkness.
If we listen to what
this history tells us,
then we must struggle
through this current moment.
We must confront the ways
that our actions and our institutions
lead to a differential treatment
of blacks, even if done unintentionally.
Today, people across the United States
are taking to streets
and are demanding to be seen,
not as dangerous
but as people whose lives have value
and deserve protection.
Some of these groups are associated
directly, and some indirectly,
with the Black Lives Matter movement.
Without the efforts of these groups,
so many of these killings
of unarmed blacks
would have been swapped under the rug,
and we would have lost attention long ago.
But so many of these activists
have denied the comforts of silence,
and they are being active
around this issue.
Their message and my message to you today
is that we must pay closer attention
to the way that black people are treated.
The story of police brutality
and killings of unarmed blacks
is not a story about black people.
It's a story about all of us,
about racial progress and the stubborn
durability of American racism.
It's about if we will stop making
the mistakes of our past
and confront our own complicity
in this great American lie
that somehow black people
are more dangerous than others.
And finally, it's about
if we have the courage
to take a collective stand
against racial injustice today.
This year, nearly half of my students
in my race and politics
upper division course
participated in a walkout in support
of the Black Lives Matter movement.
Halfway through my lecture,
I could hear the swelling crowd
of students, teachers
and community members
in the Quad at the University
of Washington.
I smiled to myself as I had a flashback
to the conversation that I had with Kenny,
now five years ago.
He was right, of course.
My books and my silence
will not save these students,
but their activism,
their courage in challenging
the status quo, and this movement
just might.
Thanks.
(Applause)